SEP-1577 - Sampling With Tools (#1796)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: docs/specification/draft/client/sampling.mdx

</Warning>

## Tools in Sampling

Servers can request that the client's LLM use tools during sampling by providing a `tools` array and optional `toolChoice` configuration in their sampling requests. This enables servers to implement agentic behaviors where the LLM can call tools, receive results, and continue the conversation&mdash;all within a single sampling request flow.

**Key capabilities:**

- Servers define tools with JSON schemas for inputs and outputs
- The LLM decides when and how to use tools (subject to `toolChoice` constraints)
- Multiple tools can be used in parallel
- Tool results are provided back to the LLM to inform subsequent responses

Clients **MUST** declare support for tool use via the `sampling.tools` capability to receive tool-enabled sampling requests. Servers **SHOULD NOT** send tool-enabled sampling requests to Clients that have not declared support for tool use via the `sampling.tools` capability.

<Info>

>   Tool use in sampling uses the same `Tool` type as regular MCP tool calls,

Reviewer: can we link to that?  I am also not really sure waht this section means. We usually refer to things in the spec as primitives, if that's what's meant here.

}
```

**With tool use support:**

```json
{
  "capabilities": {
    "sampling": {
      "tools": {}
    }
  }
}
```

**With context inclusion support (soft-deprecated):**

```json
{
  "capabilities": {
    "sampling": {
      "context": {}
    }
  }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: I am confused about this. There is no section about how this is deprecation is handled. Can we talk in separate section about handling the context inclusion?

}
```

### Sampling with Tools

To request LLM generation with tool use capabilities, servers include `tools` and optionally `toolChoice` in the request:

**Request:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "method": "sampling/createMessage",
  "params": {
    "messages": [
      {
        "role": "user",
        "content": {
          "type": "text",
          "text": "What's the weather like in Paris and London?"
        }
      }
    ],
    "tools": [
      {
        "name": "get_weather",
        "description": "Get current weather for a city",
        "inputSchema": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "city": {
              "type": "string",
              "description": "City name"
            }
          },
          "required": ["city"]
        }
      }
    ],
    "toolChoice": {
      "mode": "auto"
    },
    "maxTokens": 1000
  }
}
```

> **Response (parallel tool calls):**

Reviewer 2: I'd start with a single-call response example, then follow with this one.

Author: I'm thinking to just deemphasize the notion of parallel tool calls (Removed from title), which is the standard (and cannot be disabled; I've removed the disable_parallel_tool_call from the original SEP after realizing Gemini cannot support it). Parallel tool calls can be returned in both `"auto"` and `"required"` tool choice modes.

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "result": {
    "role": "assistant",
    "content": [
      {
        "type": "tool_use",
        "id": "call_abc123",
        "name": "get_weather",
        "input": {
          "city": "Paris"
        }
      },
      {
        "type": "tool_use",
        "id": "call_def456",
        "name": "get_weather",
        "input": {
          "city": "London"
        }
      }
    ],
    "model": "claude-3-sonnet-20240307",
    "stopReason": "toolUse"
  }
}
```

### Multi-turn Tool Loop

After receiving tool calls from the LLM, the server typically:

1. Executes the requested tools
2. Sends a new sampling request with the tool results

> 3. Receives the LLM's final response

Reviewer 2: Do we need to clarify that the loop might be extended with additional `tool_use` responses from the LLM, before a final response is sent? Or is that obvious?

This constraint ensures compatibility with provider APIs that use dedicated roles for tool results (e.g., OpenAI's "tool" role, Gemini's "function" role).

**Valid - single tool result:**

```json
{
  "role": "user",
  "content": {
    "type": "tool_result",
    "toolUseId": "call_123",
    "content": [{ "type": "text", "text": "Result data" }]
  }
}
```

**Valid - multiple tool results:**

```json
{
  "role": "user",
  "content": [
    {
      "type": "tool_result",
      "toolUseId": "call_123",
      "content": [{ "type": "text", "text": "Result 1" }]
    },
    {
      "type": "tool_result",
      "toolUseId": "call_456",
      "content": [{ "type": "text", "text": "Result 2" }]
    }
  ]
}
```

**Invalid - mixed content:**

```json
{
  "role": "user",
  "content": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "Here are the results:"
    },
    {
      "type": "tool_result",
      "toolUseId": "call_123",
      "content": [{ "type": "text", "text": "Result data" }]
    }
  ]
}
```

<Note>
  If additional context is needed alongside tool results: - Include it in the
  tool result's `content` field, OR - Send it in a separate user message before

>   or after the tool results, OR - Include it in the system prompt

Author: Actually I'm not entirely sure how well the various APIs would handle this. Removed this note altogether, I'd rather leave it at "just return the results", can't see a good reason to hint at additional context rn.

</Note>

### Tool Use and Result Balance

> When using tool use in sampling, messages **MUST** be properly balanced: every assistant message containing `ToolUseContent` (with `id: $id`) must be followed by a user message containing corresponding `ToolResultContent` (with `toolUseId: $id`) before the next assistant message.

Reviewer 2: Should this be "before the next user message" (i.e., we're saying not to send any other user message before sending the tool result)?

This requirement ensures:

- Tool uses are always resolved before the conversation continues

> - Provider APIs (especially Claude API) can process parallel tool uses correctly

Reviewer 2: "tool results", I think

also I don't think the "especially Claude API" is necessary

- The conversation maintains a consistent request-response pattern

> **Valid sequence:**

Reviewer 2: I'd change this to "Example valid sequence", since it's not the only valid sequence pattern

1. User message: "What's the weather in Paris?"
2. Assistant message: ToolUseContent (id: "call_123")
3. User message: ToolResultContent (toolUseId: "call_123")
4. Assistant message: Text response using the result

**Invalid sequence:**

1. User message: "What's the weather in Paris?"
2. Assistant message: ToolUseContent (id: "call_123")
3. Assistant message: Another response (missing tool result)

## Cross-API Compatibility

> The sampling specification is designed to work across multiple LLM provider APIs (Claude, OpenAI, Gemini, etc.). Key design decisions for compatibility:

Reviewer 2: `Claude` should probably be `Anthropic`, I think

- Generate synthetic IDs for outgoing tool calls
- Match results by position when receiving function responses
- Reorder results to match tool call IDs

### Message Roles

MCP uses two roles: "user" and "assistant". Tool results are sent as user messages. Implementations can map this to provider-specific roles:

- **Claude API**: Uses "user" and "assistant" with content-based tool calls (direct mapping)
- **OpenAI API**: Uses "tool" role for results → map MCP user messages with tool results to "tool" role
- **Gemini API**: Uses "function" role for results → map MCP user messages with tool results to "function" role

The constraint that tool result messages cannot contain mixed content types ensures clean mapping to all provider APIs.

### Tool Choice Modes

MCP's `toolChoice.mode` values map to provider APIs:

| MCP          | Claude API       | OpenAI API | Gemini API |
| ------------ | ---------------- | ---------- | ---------- |
| `"auto"`     | `{type: "auto"}` | `auto`     | `AUTO`     |
| `"required"` | `{type: "any"}`  | `required` | `ANY`      |

> | `"none"`     | `{type: "none"}` | `none`     | `NONE`     |

Reviewer 2: Should we briefly explain what these do?

### Parallel Tool Use

> MCP allows models to use multiple tools in parallel (returning an array of `ToolUseContent`). All major provider APIs support this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MCP allows models to make multiple tool use requests in parallel (returning an array of `ToolUseContent`). All major provider APIs support this:
```

- **Claude**: Supports parallel tool use natively
- **OpenAI**: Supports parallel tool calls (can be disabled with `parallel_tool_calls: false`)
- **Gemini**: Supports parallel function calls natively

Implementations wrapping providers that support disabling parallel tool use MAY expose this as an extension, but it is not part of the core MCP specification.

> 

Author: Added a diagram. Let me know if the human in the loop part is too prominent.

    Note over Client,User: Human-in-the-loop review
    Client->>User: Present request for approval
    User-->>Client: Approve/modify

    Client->>LLM: Forward request with tools
    LLM-->>Client: Response with tool_use<br/>(stopReason: "toolUse")

    Client->>User: Present tool calls for review
    User-->>Client: Approve tool calls
    Client-->>Server: Return tool_use response

    Note over Server: Execute tool(s)
    Server->>Server: Run get_weather("Paris")<br/>Run get_weather("London")

    Note over Server,Client: Continue with tool results
    Server->>Client: sampling/createMessage<br/>(history + tool_results + tools)

    Client->>User: Present continuation
    User-->>Client: Approve

    Client->>LLM: Forward with tool results
    LLM-->>Client: Final text response<br/>(stopReason: "endTurn")

    Client->>User: Present response
    User-->>Client: Approve
    Client-->>Server: Return final response

    Note over Server: Server processes result<br/>(may continue conversation...)
```

To request LLM generation with tool use capabilities, servers include `tools` and optionally `toolChoice` in the request:

> **Request:**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Request (Server -> Client):**
```

              }
            ]
          },
          {
            "type": "tool_result",
            "toolUseId": "call_def456",
            "content": [
              {
                "type": "text",
                "text": "Weather in London: 15°C, rainy"
              }
            ]
          }
        ]
      }
    ],
    "tools": [
      {
        "name": "get_weather",
        "description": "Get current weather for a city",
        "inputSchema": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "city": { "type": "string" }
          },
          "required": ["city"]
        }
      }
    ],
    "maxTokens": 1000
  }
}
```

**Final response:**

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 2,
  "result": {
    "role": "assistant",
    "content": {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "Based on the current weather data:\n\n- **Paris**: 18°C and partly cloudy - quite pleasant!\n- **London**: 15°C and rainy - you'll want an umbrella.\n\nParis has slightly warmer and drier conditions today."
    },
    "model": "claude-3-sonnet-20240307",
    "stopReason": "endTurn"
  }
}
```

## Message Content Constraints

### Tool Result Messages

> When a user message contains tool results (type: "tool_result"), it **MUST** contain ONLY tool results. Mixing tool results with other content types (text, image, audio) in the same message is not allowed.

Author: Added invalid params error examples in the Error handling section (note that we currently document `-1` for user rejection, which seems wrong)

```
Clients **SHOULD** return errors for common failure cases:
- User rejected sampling request: `-1`
- Tool result missing in request: `-32602` (Invalid params)
- Tool results mixed with other content: `-32602` (Invalid params)
```

This constraint ensures compatibility with provider APIs that use dedicated roles for tool results (e.g., OpenAI's "tool" role, Gemini's "function" role).

**Valid - single tool result:**

```json
{
  "role": "user",
  "content": {
    "type": "tool_result",
    "toolUseId": "call_123",
    "content": [{ "type": "text", "text": "Result data" }]
  }
}
```

**Valid - multiple tool results:**

```json
{
  "role": "user",
  "content": [
    {
      "type": "tool_result",
      "toolUseId": "call_123",
      "content": [{ "type": "text", "text": "Result 1" }]
    },
    {
      "type": "tool_result",
      "toolUseId": "call_456",
      "content": [{ "type": "text", "text": "Result 2" }]
    }
  ]
}
```

**Invalid - mixed content:**

```json
{
  "role": "user",
  "content": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "Here are the results:"
    },
    {
      "type": "tool_result",
      "toolUseId": "call_123",
      "content": [{ "type": "text", "text": "Result data" }]
    }
  ]
}
```

### Tool Use and Result Balance

> When using tool use in sampling, messages **MUST** be properly balanced: every assistant message containing `ToolUseContent` blocks must be followed by a user message that consist entirely of `ToolResultContent` blocks, with each tool use (e.g. with `id: $id`) matched by a corresponding tool result (with `toolUseId: $id`), before any other message.

Reviewer 2: We should specify what error the client should return if it receives a malformed sampling request - don't know the error off the top of my head but there should be something off the shelf we could use - actually you probably already know the answer via the SDK prototype 😁

3. Clients **SHOULD** respect model preference hints
4. Clients **SHOULD** implement rate limiting
5. Both parties **MUST** handle sensitive data appropriately

When tools are used in sampling, additional security considerations apply:

> 6. Servers **MUST** ensure that when replying to a `stopReason: "toolUse"`, each `ToolUseContent` item is responded to with a `ToolResultContent` item with a matching `toolUseId`, and that the user message contains only tool results (no other content types)

Reviewer 2: Per comment above, here we should either
* clarify that the user message containing only tool results doesn't need to be the only user message returned, or
* revise our advice about how to avoid mixing content types

Clients **SHOULD** return errors for common failure cases:

> - User rejected sampling request: `-1`

Reviewer: Does JSON RPC have a specific error integer range for custom errors?

Author: The `-1` is what is used a couple of lines below in the existing example for `User rejected sampling request`, and looks like it's actually *fine as an application error*.

The [json rpc spec](https://json-rpc.dev/docs/reference/error-codes)'s `Custom Error Codes` section says:

> For application-specific errors, the JSON-RPC 2.0 specification allows using any error code outside the reserved range (-32768 to -32000). Custom error codes are typically chosen based on the specific needs of your application.

> Recommended Ranges
> Range	Usage
> ...
> -31999 to -1	Recommended for general application errors
